Advances in single-cell RNA-seq technologies now enable large-scale measurements of cellular responses to genetic and chemical perturbations, fueling this exciting era of predictive cellular modeling. The Virtual Cell Challenge is a recurring, open, community-driven challenge aimed at evaluating and improving computational models that predict cellular responses to genetic or chemical perturbations.

In 2026, the Challenge raises the bar to multi-context generalization and zero-shot prediction. We are not providing any net-new training dataset this year. Participants are free to use the H1 human embryonic stem cell data released last year, as well as any other public or private data to which you have access. In the Challenge, you will predict how multiple cell lines respond to specified gene knockdowns, given only non-targeting control profiles, and your predictions will be scored against new experimental perturbation data developed by Arc Institute from those cell lines, without your model having been trained on any of that data. The Challenge is intended specifically to encourage industry participation, in addition to academia and individual entrants, by not requiring open weights or code to be submitted with entries.

What data sets are part of the Challenge?

There is no Challenge-specific training set in 2026. At the start of the Challenge you receive the non-targeting control (NTC) profiles for the validation cell lines plus the perturbations to predict; in the final week (starting October 22), you receive the control profiles for the held-out test cell lines. You predict the perturbation responses, and final rankings are based on the test set. Read more about the data here.
Can I use other data to train or fine tune my model?

As long as you have the appropriate permissions to use the data, you may use any data to improve the performance of your predictions. This includes proprietary data you have access to. The Challenge will not need access to your data for the competition.
How was the benchmark data processed?

The multi-cell-line Perturb-seq data were generated with 10x Genomics Flex and processed and filtered analogously; released profiles are raw counts.